Hi, this is Craig Golightly,
and welcome to Designing Workload‑Specific Databases.
So what do you need to consider when designing a workload‑specific database?
Requirements are one of the biggest drivers of database design,
so we'll take a closer look into what type of
requirements you need to pay attention to.
Next we'll cover availability and the importance of
understanding what type of availability is needed.
Doing too much in this area could add unnecessary time
and cost to your implementation,
but not doing enough could spell disaster for your application.
Finally,
we'll look at cost and what you can do to manage costs in your database design.
If someone asked you to make them a sandwich, what would you do?
In about 30 seconds,
you could put together a peanut butter sandwich using bread
and peanut butter you bought from the store.
You could also take several hours to assemble a culinary work of art,
baking fresh bread, chopping vegetables,
and boiling and slicing an egg.
Technically, they're both a sandwich, but the time,
expense, and materials needed to build each one is very different.
Understanding and clarifying requirements is key to building a
workload‑specific database. Let's start with the type and volume of
data you expect to work with in the database.
If the database is primarily binary in nature,
like images and audio or video files,
then you're probably going to want to manage those differently than
if the data is mostly rows and columns of numbers.
If your input and output is mainly JSON documents,
then it may not make sense to constantly tear down and build up
that data structure into individual fields.
You may want to go with a database that natively supports
querying attributes from JSON documents.
How often your data format changes is another important factor. Is
the schema static and you don't expect it to change much? Or is it
dynamic with frequent changes? Finally,
data size. How much data are you going to have, gigabytes,
terabytes, or petabytes?
Data volume alone can sometimes dictate your database choice simply
because it may exceed the working capacity of some databases. The
type of workload you're going to support with your database and
what kind of performance is expected also have a major influence on
database design.
What is your overall query volume going to be? Extremely high
workloads can overwhelm some database types,
so having an idea of your upper bound can help you keep up with query volume.
What about workload duration?
Will you have a consistent load 24/7, or will there be periods of lower traffic?
How fast does traffic ramp up?
You'll need a scaling strategy to support your traffic patterns.
If there are periods of no traffic,
you maybe able to optimize costs by scaling down during those times.
What mix of your workload is going to be reads versus writes?
Many databases support adding additional read replicas, but if
your application is write heavy,
then read replicas won't necessarily be the answer.
Expected response time is another thing that needs a
very clear requirement definition.
Going back to our sandwich example,
I could spend 4 hours making a gourmet sandwich that my 4‑year‑old
daughter wouldn't even take a bite of, while she would be delighted with
the 30‑second peanut butter sandwich and 3 hours and 59 minutes of my
time playing games or reading to her.
From her perspective,
the opportunity cost of a great sandwich isn't worth giving up more game time.
Everyone wants their data fast,
but do they need single‑digit‑millisecond response time?
It's important to understand and be able to communicate the
additional cost and sometimes complexity required for faster
response times so that organizations can make informed decisions
about where to use their resources.
Sometimes you hit the law of diminishing returns when it comes to
performance optimization. It's often a better overall use of
resources to stop once it's fast enough,
then shift focus to work on other features that add value to the application.
Response time is often a user experience question.
Is it a real‑time application where users will expect very quick response times?
Or is it a batch process that is expected to take a while?
Finally, compliance.
Certain data is subject to regulatory requirements.
This usually involves storing the data in an encrypted database.
However,
you'll also need to ensure that the data is secure in
transit to and from the database, as well as encrypting any backups of that data.
If you're subject to audits,
you'll need proper audit logs to demonstrate compliance in your operations.
Be sure that is a supported feature in your database
and that audit logs are enabled.
You'll also need to know how to give an auditor access to inspect the audit logs.